---
# when box opened
hide_title: true
title: "Software Sustainability Institute"
subtitle:
image: ../assets/img/clients/SSI_PRIMARY-LOGO.png
alt: SSI logo
modalID: portfolioSSIRCM1012025

# preview
caption:
  title: Software Sustainability Institute RCM101
  subtitle: Professionalised Research Community Management training for SSI Fellows
  thumbnail: ../assets/img/clients/SSI_PRIMARY-LOGO.png

---
<!-- note all headings should be H3 or greater -->
### Project overview
In partnership with the [Software Sustainability Institute (SSI)](https://www.software.ac.uk), RCM Cooperative successfully delivered a pilot training program designed to formalise and professionalise the Research Community Management role. This initiative recognises the growing number of Research Software Engineers (RSEs), and particularly SSI Fellows, who are leading community projects but have little access to training in community management practices and strategy.

### Strategic objectives & methodology

The project was structured around our "RCM101" framework, focusing on the functional and strategic processes required to lead sustainable research communities.

1. **Curriculum Development and Training Delivery:** Creation and delivery of reusable training materials covering fundamental skills including guidance for assessment, structuring, and staging engagement methods for managing communities.

1. **Interactive Pedagogy:** Facilitating post-training "Community Clinics" to contextualise the practical frameworks and ground theoretical RCM principles in real-world research challenges.

1. **Open Science Methodology:** Throughout the process, we ensured adherence to open science principles by providing recorded sessions, templates, and documentation for asynchronous learning and future reuse. A citable version of all resources were published on [GitHub and Zenodo](https://github.com/rcmcooperative/SSI-RCM101-Training).

### Outcomes

- **Proof of need**: The partnership validated the need for community strategy focused training and resources, and in particular, highlighted the value of facilitated group coaching in the form of Community Clinics.
- **Alignment across communities**: Participants highlighted the significant value of our [frameworks and articulated processes](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.00108), supporting alignment in the use of these tools across RSE roles. 
- **Communicating about their work**: In their feedback, participants highlighted the impact of the simple metaphors we used to describe RCM work, such as “Documentation is our love language”, "RCMs are glue", and "If you are doing it alone, you are doing it wrong". They also valued the framing around the purpose of communities as both a marketing tool and complex problem-solving ecosystem. 
 
Although a foundational training, these facilitated sessions served as an important instrument to help participants understand the core concepts and practices of Research Community Management. A dedicated safe space for open interaction allowed the learners to dig deeper into how best practices could be applied in their work, and improve how they communicate about what they do, using shared language and accessible metaphors. 

### Impact
We asked [Aman Gobel at University of Manchester](https://www.software.ac.uk/fellowship-programme/aman-goel) to tell us about their experience of the training:

*”The training and clinics were immensely helpful and **boosted my confidence** as a community manager! **The tools made it easier** to analyse key factors, map out activities, and ideate potential solutions that play a key role in community management. This has made me **more time-efficient and able to prioritise my responsibilities and goals** for the community. The discussions helped me understand new methodologies and approaches to project management, governance and collaboration, which has been **useful in scaffolding other projects** and helped me identify new collaboration opportunities. The reminders to acknowledge our wins more often and trust the process were crucial for me. They made me reflect on what we have already achieved as a community and left me **excited for what's coming up**!”*

### What happened next

Following this training, SSI has commissioned [OLS](http://we-are-ols.org/) and RCM Cooperative to deliver "RCM for Leaders" training as part of their [Cohort Based Open Leadership Training and Mentoring](https://discourse-network.github.io/projects/1-37-open-leadership/) programme, funded by [DisCouRSE](https://discourse-network.github.io) - a UKRI-funded Network+ project that will encourage and support the development of leaders across all digital Research Technical Professional (dRTP) roles. 

We are continuing to work with SSI on a successfully funded [DisCouRSE research project to discover hidden community leaders](https://discourse-network.github.io/projects/1-30-discovering-leaders/).

Cassandra Gould van Praag was selected as an [SSI Fellow this year](https://www.software.ac.uk/fellowship-programme/cassandra-gould-van-praag), through a competitive application and assessment process. She will be joining Emma Karoune and Malvika Sharan among a large network of Fellows dedicated to improving software in research.

### RCM Cooperative’s specialised service model

RCM Cooperative leverages the breadth of our expertise to bring bespoke community solutions to your organisation.
- **Professional RCM Training:** We deliver the RCM101 curriculum, tailored to your sector’s specific technical and social requirements.
- **Strategic Coaching & Mentorship:** We offer "Community Clinics" to help project leads navigate complex member environments and build consensus.
- **Open Infrastructure Design:** We provide technical expertise in setting up equitable collaboration tools (e.g., GitHub, Slack) and documented workflows to ensure operational transparency.

Take a look at the [github repo we used for managing and archiving materials for this project](https://github.com/rcmcooperative/SSI-RCM101-Training/tree/main).


